---
date: 2024-11-02
---

# Counting colors

I used to count colors. I did this everywhere I went, without choosing to or wanting to. It was just something that happened. There was no goal, no purpose, it was just this background process that I had little control over. I started at zero and counted up. Some colors were worth more points than others; I never really questioned this. Sheen and translucency also affected point totals. (Perhaps this was the world's most boring cousin of synesthesia?) Like many children my world was small - home, my parents' car, my Hoover classroom - and so common patterns of items started to emerge. In the family dining room, my eyes would dart from the chair leg to chair cushion to clear table cloth to wainscoting, then repeat. Baby's first subroutine.

I also just...counted. Or multiplied, rather. I'd start with 1 and just keep doubling it as long as I could keep the numbers straight in my head. 1, 2, 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, 128, 256, 512, 1024, 2048, 4096, 8192, 16384, 32768. Soon the sequence became so familiar that I must have simply been repeating it from memory rather than calculating it anew. Both this and the color counting were vaguely compulsive, but this at least offered some challenge. I grew to recognize where my typical limit was, where the numbers began to fuzz in my brain, and breaking through these plateaus presented small, infrequent victories. I still sometimes wished to be rid of the habit though.

As I grew older, I managed to discard these particular strains of counting. I graduated to scratching out custom statistics in the margins of Giants box scores, and, on one particularly inspired occasion, trying to teach myself algrebra from some old workbooks my mom's friend had "gifted" us. But numbers were no longer so inextricably woven into my moment-to-moment experience and if I had thought to notice it, it would have come as a relief. But it was merely a temporary displacement. Eventually the counting returned, but this time with meaning attached. The number of days until I'd be past that brutal calculus test. The number of pounds I could add to my weighted chinups in the next 12 months. The number of months I'd remain at a job or the number of dollars I could hope to see in this year's salary adjustments. These new flows of numbers were just as intrusive as the colors I used to count but they were more loaded. They quantified outcomes that mattered, at least in my mind, and this constant internal chant strengthened that belief. It is, it turns out, quite difficult to fixate on a number that is not at least vaguely self-destructive. Number of compliments I'll give today? Number of times I'll make someone feel appreciated this week? Number of dollars I'll give to charity? Maybe it's that easy and I'm just making excuses, but certainly the numbers that surfaced naturally were not along those lines.

Recognizing the harm this habit could do if left unabated, I sometimes made half-hearted efforts to escape it. Usually the closest I came was replacing one counting habit with another comparably toxic one. Now the thought of stopping entirely feels...odd. Like eliminating some fundamental property of the universe, "Harrison be counting". Or to paraphrase Dan Harmon on quitting twitter, like going in for surgery and realizing maybe you're the tumor. And counting the number of puppies I'll save today doesn't feel like a realistic long term solution.

Maybe it's time to start counting colors again.
